README.md, before:

<div align="center">

<!-- 🌹 Big calligraphy name (pink) — widened so it won't clip -->
<img src="https://readme-typing-svg.demolab.com?font=Great+Vibes&size=120&pause=1600&color=FF5DA2&center=true&vCenter=true&width=2400&height=160&lines=Cindy+Elizabeth+Chavarria+Minera" />


<!-- Soft gold subtitle -->
<img src="https://readme-typing-svg.demolab.com?font=Inter&size=26&pause=1600&color=F7A8C6&center=true&vCenter=true&width=1600&lines=Data+Scientist+%7C+NLP+%7C+ML+Monitoring+%7C+Analytics;Python+%7C+SQL+%7C+Power+BI+%7C+Databricks" />

<!-- Blush divider -->
<img src="https://capsule-render.vercel.app/api?type=rect&height=4&color=F7A8C6&section=header" width="78%" />

<p>
  <b>Data Scientist</b> turning messy operational + behavioral data into <b>reliable signals</b> —
  distribution-aware NLP/EDA, monitoring-minded ML, and exec-ready reporting.
</p>

<p>🔐 <b>Active Security Clearance:</b> Interim Top Secret (TS)</p>


<p>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=python&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/SQL-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=postgresql&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Power%20BI%20(DAX)-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=powerbi&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/NLP-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Machine%20Learning-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=scikitlearn&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Databricks-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=databricks&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
</p>




<p>
<p>
  <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/cindy-chavarria">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/LinkedIn-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=linkedin&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
  <a href="mailto:cindyelizabethchavarriaminera@gmail.com">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Email-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=gmail&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
  <a href="#-selected-work">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Selected%20Work-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
  <a href="#-project-deep-dives">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Deep%20Dives-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=readme&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
  <a href="#-methods--toolkit">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Methods-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=bookstack&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
</p>

---

## ✦ Profile
I specialize in **measuring language + operations as signal**:
- **Distribution-first NLP/EDA** (imbalance, long tails, rare-event surfacing)
- **Monitoring-minded ML** (anomalies, drift awareness, actionable alerting)
- **Executive reporting systems** (metrics that survive scrutiny + ship fast)

---

## ⭐ Selected Work

| Track | What I ship | Link |
|---|---|---|
| **Python (Data Science + NLP + Data Engineering)** | sentiment pipelines • log-scale distribution visuals • outlier surfacing • Databricks RAG ingestion (PDF → chunks → Delta tables) | **Repo:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python |
| **SQL (Healthcare analytics)** | intermediate SQL patterns • joins/windows • reporting queries • healthcare context (CPT, visits, metrics) | **Repo:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Sql |

---

## 🔎 Project Deep Dives

### 1) Bitcoin Sentiment Analysis — *Distribution-first NLP analytics*
**Goal:** quantify sentiment dynamics while preserving rare/high-intensity signals (what averages hide).  
**Highlights**
- VADER compound scoring + reproducible EDA workflow  
- Log-scaled visuals to surface rare extremes under heavy imbalance  
- Readability-focused token/hashtag visuals for interpretability  

➡️ **Project:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/bitcoin_sentiment_analysis

---

### 2) AESTHETIQ Assistant — Databricks RAG Ingestion Pipeline *(Production-style)*
**Goal:** create a reliable ingestion foundation for RAG (embeddings + vector search).  
**Highlights**
- Extract → chunk → normalize into Delta tables (`documents`, `chunks`, `failures`)  
- Incremental processing + hashing (dedupe) + failure logging (observability)  
- Page-aware text handling where available; built to scale in Databricks  

➡️ **Project:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/aesthetiq_databricks_rag_ingestion_pipeline

---

### 3) Experiments (Rapid prototyping)
A sandbox for AI-assisted workflows, decision logic, and automation experiments.

➡️ **Folder:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/experiments

---

<details>
  <summary><b>📌 Recommended pins (top 4–6)</b></summary>

- Python (umbrella repo): https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python  
- Bitcoin Sentiment Analysis: https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/bitcoin_sentiment_analysis  
- AESTHETIQ RAG Ingestion Pipeline: https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/aesthetiq_databricks_rag_ingestion_pipeline  
- SQL Portfolio: https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Sql  

</details>

---

## ⚙ Methods & Toolkit
**Python:** pandas, numpy, matplotlib  
**NLP / Text:** VADER, tokenization, n-grams, interpretable feature signals  
**ML:** anomaly detection, monitoring patterns, evaluation hygiene  
**BI:** Power BI (DAX), KPI design, executive reporting  
**SQL:** joins, window functions, reusable reporting patterns  
**Platform:** Databricks + Delta Lake (ingestion foundations)

---

## 🧪 Engineering Standards (How I work)
- Clear structure (`/src`, `/notebooks`, `/assets`) + documented assumptions
- Reproducible outputs (tables + figures saved, deterministic where possible)
- “Explainable by design” (readable visuals + interpretable features)
- Monitoring-first thinking (failure logging + drift awareness)

---

<div align="center">

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Chavarriaminera/Chavarriaminera/main/assets/sigil.png" width="12" alt="" />
<p><i>“Cleanse → Calibrate → Reveal Signal.”</i> ✧</p>

</div>

Commit message:

Revise README with profile and work details
Updated the README to include a summary of skills and interests.

README.md, after:

<div align="center">

<!-- 🌹 Big calligraphy name (pink) — widened so it won't clip -->
<img src="https://readme-typing-svg.demolab.com?font=Great+Vibes&size=120&pause=1600&color=FF5DA2&center=true&vCenter=true&width=2400&height=160&lines=Cindy+Elizabeth+Chavarria+Minera" />


<!-- Soft gold subtitle -->
<img src="https://readme-typing-svg.demolab.com?font=Inter&size=26&pause=1600&color=F7A8C6&center=true&vCenter=true&width=1600&lines=Data+Scientist+%7C+NLP+%7C+ML+Monitoring+%7C+Analytics;Python+%7C+SQL+%7C+Power+BI+%7C+Databricks" />

<!-- Blush divider -->
<img src="https://capsule-render.vercel.app/api?type=rect&height=4&color=F7A8C6&section=header" width="78%" />

<p>
  <b>Data Scientist</b> turning messy operational + behavioral data into <b>reliable signals</b> —
  distribution-aware NLP/EDA, monitoring-minded ML, and exec-ready reporting.
</p>

<p>🔐 <b>Active Security Clearance:</b> Interim Top Secret (TS)</p>


<p>
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=python&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/SQL-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=postgresql&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Power%20BI%20(DAX)-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=powerbi&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/NLP-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Machine%20Learning-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=scikitlearn&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Databricks-FDE2E9?style=for-the-badge&logo=databricks&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
</p>




<p>
<p>
  <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/cindy-chavarria">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/LinkedIn-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=linkedin&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
  <a href="mailto:cindyelizabethchavarriaminera@gmail.com">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Email-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=gmail&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
  <a href="#-selected-work">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Selected%20Work-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
  <a href="#-project-deep-dives">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Deep%20Dives-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=readme&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
  <a href="#-methods--toolkit">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Methods-FF8FC4?style=for-the-badge&logo=bookstack&logoColor=2A0F1D" />
  </a>
</p>

---
## ✦ Summary

I’m a Data Scientist who blends a strong behavioral foundation with practical, production-minded analytics. With an M.S. in Psychology, I translate human behavior and messy real-world operations into measurable signals—then present them in a way that’s clear, defensible, and decision-ready.

### What I work on
<img src="https://capsule-render.vercel.app/api?type=rect&height=1&color=FF5DA2&section=header" width="210" />

- **Python + NLP/EDA:** sentiment analysis, distribution-aware exploration (imbalance/long tails), and visualization choices that surface rare but meaningful patterns rather than hiding them in averages.
- **SQL analytics (healthcare):** reporting + metrics workflows—joins, window functions, and reusable reporting structures tied to operational realities.
- **Databricks / RAG foundations:** reliable ingestion layers (PDF → extracted text → chunked outputs → structured tables) with hashing/deduplication and failure logging to support embeddings + retrieval quality.

### How I think
<img src="https://capsule-render.vercel.app/api?type=rect&height=1&color=F7A8C6&section=header" width="170" />

I bring a **monitoring mindset** to analytics—prioritizing reliability, drift/anomaly awareness, and outputs that can be trusted over time (not just in a one-off notebook).  


### Off-hours
<img src="https://capsule-render.vercel.app/api?type=rect&height=1&color=FDE2E9&section=header" width="140" />
Woking on my working on my code, with my family, stock trading, or working on my AI Pokémon team builder.

Fun Fact about me: *Milotic* is my favorite for the same reason I like good models: elegant, resilient, major glow-up energy, and hard to knock off course.

<div align="center">
  <img src="assets/milotic.png" width="240" alt="Milotic" />
</div>


---


---

## ⭐ Selected Work

| Track | What I ship | Link |
|---|---|---|
| **Python (Data Science + NLP + Data Engineering)** | sentiment pipelines • log-scale distribution visuals • outlier surfacing • Databricks RAG ingestion (PDF → chunks → Delta tables) | **Repo:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python |
| **SQL (Healthcare analytics)** | intermediate SQL patterns • joins/windows • reporting queries • healthcare context (CPT, visits, metrics) | **Repo:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Sql |

---

## 🔎 Project Deep Dives

### 1) Bitcoin Sentiment Analysis — *Distribution-first NLP analytics*
**Goal:** quantify sentiment dynamics while preserving rare/high-intensity signals (what averages hide).  
**Highlights**
- VADER compound scoring + reproducible EDA workflow  
- Log-scaled visuals to surface rare extremes under heavy imbalance  
- Readability-focused token/hashtag visuals for interpretability  

➡️ **Project:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/bitcoin_sentiment_analysis

---

### 2) AESTHETIQ Assistant — Databricks RAG Ingestion Pipeline *(Production-style)*
**Goal:** create a reliable ingestion foundation for RAG (embeddings + vector search).  
**Highlights**
- Extract → chunk → normalize into Delta tables (`documents`, `chunks`, `failures`)  
- Incremental processing + hashing (dedupe) + failure logging (observability)  
- Page-aware text handling where available; built to scale in Databricks  

➡️ **Project:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/aesthetiq_databricks_rag_ingestion_pipeline

---

### 3) Experiments (Rapid prototyping)
A sandbox for AI-assisted workflows, decision logic, and automation experiments.

➡️ **Folder:** https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/experiments

---

<details>
  <summary><b>📌 Recommended pins (top 4–6)</b></summary>

- Python (umbrella repo): https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python  
- Bitcoin Sentiment Analysis: https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/bitcoin_sentiment_analysis  
- AESTHETIQ RAG Ingestion Pipeline: https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Python/tree/main/aesthetiq_databricks_rag_ingestion_pipeline  
- SQL Portfolio: https://github.com/Chavarriaminera/Sql  

</details>

---

## ⚙ Methods & Toolkit
**Python:** pandas, numpy, matplotlib  
**NLP / Text:** VADER, tokenization, n-grams, interpretable feature signals  
**ML:** anomaly detection, monitoring patterns, evaluation hygiene  
**BI:** Power BI (DAX), KPI design, executive reporting  
**SQL:** joins, window functions, reusable reporting patterns  
**Platform:** Databricks + Delta Lake (ingestion foundations)

---

## 🧪 Engineering Standards (How I work)
- Clear structure (`/src`, `/notebooks`, `/assets`) + documented assumptions
- Reproducible outputs (tables + figures saved, deterministic where possible)
- “Explainable by design” (readable visuals + interpretable features)
- Monitoring-first thinking (failure logging + drift awareness)

---

<div align="center">

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Chavarriaminera/Chavarriaminera/main/assets/sigil.png" width="12" alt="" />
<p><i>“Cleanse → Calibrate → Reveal Signal.”</i> ✧</p>

</div>
